---
share: true
strip_comments: true
fix_heading: true
title: Patents and Laws
aliases:
---
As the number and types of biobanks increase so, too, have the number of court rulings associated with biobanking, resulting in a significant impact on the diversity of, and public access to, banked human tissues and cells. Court cases can be divided into those addressing the patenting of banking processes and those that address banked products.

In 2002, Pharmastem, a leader in cord blood banking, sought licensing fees from commercial umbilical cord banks using their collection, freezing, and storage technology. Ultimately, Pharmastem sued the commercial banks for patent infringement, threatening the livelihood of not only commercial cord blood banks but public cord blood banks as well. The cord blood banks argued that the technologies were ubiquitous in cell banking and thus, considered “prior art.” In 2009, the courts decided that the Pharmastem patents were invalid because the companies were not buying or selling cord blood, but simply providing a paid service to families interested in banking their newborn’s blood stem cells (<mark style="background: #ADCCFFA6;">Kurtzberg, J. et al. 2005</mark>).

In 2013, the US Supreme court decided that Myriad Genetics’s product patents on BRCA1/2 DNA sequences were not valid, reversing twenty years of patenting in the biotech sector. The court, however, maintained the validity of process patents for techniques in which a drug or diagnostic is developed based on DNA sequence information. Following these earlier rulings, it would seem that tissue samples themselves can not be patented because they occur naturally in human bodies, making them a public good (<mark style="background: #ADCCFFA6;">Marshall & Price, 2013</mark>). Yet, any discoveries made using such samples would continue to be patentable and thus, marketable. This stance regarding tissues and cells is apparent in decisions to invalidate the Wisconsin Alumni Research Fund (WARF) patents on the first human embryonic stem cell lines, which were created using private funding and extranumerary embryos that had been donated from fertility clinics (<mark style="background: #ADCCFFA6;">Wadman, 2005</mark>).

In all of the above instances, financial benefit could be bestowed to all stakeholders, except the individuals from whom tissue or DNA samples are acquired (<mark style="background: #ADCCFFA6;">Kominers & Becker, 2012</mark>). In the US, the Bayh-Dole act of 1980 permits development of marketable and patentable products using basic scientific research conducted by universities that are funded by federal money (<mark style="background: #ADCCFFA6;">Loise & Stevens, 2010</mark>). This policy has created the field of translational science, which involves moving basic science from the laboratory bench to the clinic.

In some cases, the perceived inequity of financial benefit to some stakeholders (biomedical researchers, universities, the pharmaceutical industry, or national governments) and not others (human research subjects) has resulted in patients who sue to protect their individual rights as they relate to ownership and compensation. In most cases, courts have declared loss of individual ownership for material that has been removed from the body in a therapeutic context.

To avoid such complications and reduce undue inducement associated with participation, France has restricted monetary payments to human research subjects. (<mark style="background: #ADCCFFA6;">VanderWalde & Kurzban, 2011</mark>). Meanwhile, many countries are utilizing opt-out policies in which all clinical samples can be used for research under the auspices of “presumed consent,” with no financial benefit accruing to donors regardless of whether therapies or diagnostics are developed using their samples (<mark style="background: #ADCCFFA6;">Anonymous, 2013</mark>). This approach is already used in five countries in the realm of organ donation and is continuing to expand (<mark style="background: #ADCCFFA6;">Harman, 2009</mark>).

<mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">**Video:** Nov 11, 2015. The Challenge of Informed Consent In Times of Controversy. UC Irvine School of Law. Video footage is broken up by speaker and topic. Panels are tackle complicated issues. Radhika Rhao specifically addresses Henrietta Lacks and Deborah Laufer, playwright of Informed Consent site pushes back on biomedical ethics, while Marcy Darnovsky brings in issues of equity and social justice on Panel 2. Link</mark>

