---
share: true
strip_comments: true
fix_heading: true
title: Introduction to Primer
---
In 1951, cervical cancer cells from Henrietta Lacks, an African-American woman being treated in the “colored” ward of Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore, were the first grown outside the human body in a Petri dish. This is the most widely used cell culture in biomedical research yet, for decades, her family was marginalized by the very health care system that her cells support. Now, many years later, the biomedical research community is revisiting the story of Henrietta Lacks, the establishment of the HeLa cell line, and the role of community in biomedical research studies. What lessons can be learned from this case? Can we challenge the normative assumptions surrounding biomedical research to support more just and informed participation in shaping healthcare practices and policies? What roles can individuals and communities play in directing research that serves their needs?

!!! note inline end
	- <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Note that the yellow highlighted areas refer to media or the accompanying HeLa Primer PPT.</mark>
	- <mark style="background: #FFB8EBA6;">Note that the pink hightlights refer to the infographics available on the SCAC website</mark>
	- *Bracketed references in italics throughout the text refer to the HeLa Primer Powerpoint, and are linked to the SCAC website where that Powerpoint can be downloaded.*

This primer addresses these questions through an historical overview of biomedical research and an exploration of contemporary practices and policies surrounding research with human subjects to advance basic scientific knowledge and biomedicine.

[Section I](../Primer/1.%20How%20Have%20Human%20Tissues%20and%20Cells%20Been%20Used%20for%20Biomedical%20Research?/I.%20How%20Have%20Human%20Tissues%20and%20Cells%20Been%20Used%20for%20Biomedical%20Research?.md) reviews the emergence of biomedical research highlighting both the excitement and caution that accompanied this burgeoning field. This section uses two historically important proposals, Science: The Endless Frontier, which advocated for government investment in basic science, and the World Health Organization’s proposed definition of health. Both of these proclamations, made in 1945 and 1946 respectively, were perceived to promote social well-being in a post-WWII era. This section also introduces the biomedical and social models of health and reviews approaches that seek to create inclusive environments that account for variance in physical and cognitive abilities within the human population. A social justice framework is used to analyze health equity through three specific approaches: distributive justice, which seeks to provide universal access to the knowledge and goods produced through research; procedural justice which involves the actions of multiple stakeholders in health policy decision making; and responsive justice which requires research and policy to be informed by community input. A review of books and resources that further this dialogue is also included.

[Section II](../Primer/2.%20What%20Is%20A%20Cell?%20What%20is%20Cell%20Research?/II.%20What%20Is%20A%20Cell?%20What%20is%20Cell%20Research?.md) reviews the history of biology as it relates to our understanding of cell structures and organization into tissues and organs, with special attention to bioecological niches.

[Section III](../Primer/3.%20How%20Does%20Tissue%20Culture%20Technology%20Contribute%20to%20Steam%20Cell%20Research%20(SCR)?/III.%20How%20Does%20Tissue%20Culture%20Technology%20Contribute%20to%20Steam%20Cell%20Research%20(SCR)?.md) presents the basic principles and concepts of cell biology such as cell division, cancer, and the role that “immortality” plays in the establishment of the first human cell lines. This section also emphasizes the need for cell lines as biological tools of study and highlights the unique features they bring to research. This biological address is necessary in trying to unpack the ethical issues associated with human subjects research.

[Section IV](../Primer/4.%20The%20First%20Human%20Cell%20Lines_HeLa%20and%20WI-38/IV.%20The%20First%20Human%20Cell%20Lines_HeLa%20and%20WI-38.md) reviews the historical trajectory of the first two human cell lines, HeLa and WI-38, and explores issues of commercialization, dissemination, and commodification. Section IV also touches on the social implications of separating cells from the body, and the ways in which such disassociation raises questions concerning ownership, privacy, and commodification.

[Section V](../Primer/5.%20HeLa%20Cultures%20and%20Contamination_The%20Intersection%20of%20Biology,%20Race,%20Class%20and%20Gender/V.%20HeLa%20Cultures%20and%20Contamination.md) reviews the techniques and practices associated with cell culture, cell banking, and cell identification. This section also uses an intersectional analysis to highlight the interplay of biology, race, class, and gender in shaping the meaning of “cell line contamination,” both within, and outside, the scientific community.

In [Section VI](../Primer/6.%20Cervical%20Cancer,%20HPV,%20and%20TERC_Prevalence%20and%20Diagnostics/VI.%20Cervical%20Cancer,%20HPV%20and%20TERC_Prevalence%20and%20Diagnostics.md), the relationship between human papilloma virus (HPV) and cancer is clarified, with specific attention to the role of telomerase and genomic instability in the establishment of the HeLa cell line, the emergence of new diagnostic tools for HPV infection and cancer, and our increased understanding of stem cell niches.

In [Section VII](../Primer/7.%20What%20Policies%20Are%20in%20Place%20for%20Regulating%20Research%20with%20Human%20Subjects?/VII.%20What%20Policies%20Are%20in%20Place%20for%20Regulating%20Research%20with%20Human%20Subjects?.md), practices regarding the participation of human subjects in research is reviewed, including an historical overview of informed consent and various policies regarding risk and harm to subjects.

[Section VIII.](../Primer/8.%20Altruistic%20Donor,%20Paid%20Research%20Subject,%20or%20Savvy%20Negotiator/VIII.%20Altruistic%20Donor,%20Paid%20Research%20Subject,%20or%20Savvy%20Negotiator.md) reviews the changing landscape of human subjects research, paying close attention to the evolution of laws and guidelines to recast privacy and ownership of human tissues, cells, and DNA within the context of emerging biocapital.

**Section IX** presents contemporary case analyses regarding ownership, recognition, and compensation in the context of bone marrow donation (Flynn v. Holder), egg procurement (New York and California policies)

**Section X** presents cases where altruistic donation of human tissue and DNA are being used in contexts without adequate informed consent and for profit including genomic banks (Havasupai v. Arizona State University), umbilical cord banks, and milk banks.