---
share: true
strip_comments: true
fix_heading: true
aliases:
  - Cell Line Communication
---
Undergirding the exciting discoveries and innovation that accompanied the development of cell culture techniques is one of the most challenging issues plaguing biologists over the past 50 years, namely cell line contamination. Because a cell line is defined as a collection of cultured cells derived from one specific tissue in a single donor, its provenance is of importance. While the ability to divide indefinitely is certainly the most essential quality of a cell line, the specificity of the cells’ origin from a single tissue type and from a single donor is a crucial aspect of the research conducted using this tool. For example, a potential stomach cancer drug would need to be tested specifically on human stomach cancer cells, not lung or other tissue origins. Similarly, for stem cell transplant therapies, most often the donor and the recipient should be one and the same, to reduce graft rejection due to immune incompatibility. In these instances, cross-contamination of cell lines (where a more aggressive cell line take over the culture) becomes an issue, as the validity of the study or the efficacy of transplant therapy depends on knowing the very specific origin of the cells (<mark style="background: #ADCCFFA6;">Masters, 2002</mark>).

After HeLa was developed in 1951, scientists were able to culture other human cancers using Gey’s technique, and soon after the issue of contamination emerged. As scientists started culturing non-cancerous human cells, they noticed that their cells “spontaneously transformed” in culture to divide rapidly and continuously like cancer. Not long after, scientists began finding evidence of interspecies contamination among cell lines. As early as 1957, researchers were using immunological and karyotyping techniques (observation of chromosomes) to determine species of origin and detect cross-contamination between lines of different species. The use of fluorescent antibody detection in the early 1960s furthered such discoveries. This led scientists to wonder whether cross-contamination was occurring for cultured cells within a species as well.

In 1967, Stanley Gartler made an astonishing discovery that was deeply disturbing to biologists working on human cell lines (<mark style="background: #ADCCFFA6;">Culliton, 1974</mark>). Using isoenzyme analysis (a technique comparing enzymes that vary within a species), Gartler showed that two separate human enzymes, G6PD and PGM, which were known to vary within the human population, were identical for each cell line in his survey of 18 human lines sampled from the ATCC. The statistical odds of all 18 cell lines sharing identical phenotypes for these two proteins are nearly impossible. There were only two explanations: either all cell lines reverted to this phenotype in culture, or the cell lines were identical, a result of contaminating overgrowth by an aggressive cell line (<mark style="background: #ADCCFFA6;">Oliwenstein, 1992; Masters, 2002</mark>).

In the 1950s, there were a limited number of cell lines and most were established from tissues obtained from Caucasians. Thus, the frequency distribution of two variants of the gene coding for the G6PH enzyme was utilized as a means of identifying the HeLa cells line as Black. The “A” variant is the result of a genetic mutation that reduces the efficiency of the enzyme, but is believed to provide a protective effect against malaria, reducing infection rates by 46-58% (<mark style="background: #ADCCFFA6;">Ruwende et al., 1995</mark>). This variant is more common in individuals of African descent given their continued environmental exposure to mosquitoes harboring the protozoa Plasmodium falciparum responsible for malaria. Over time, African populations living in endemic malaria zones evolved to carry this gene variant as it improved survival.

The race-based analysis of the HeLa cell line was only possible given the small number of cell lines at the time and the limited population sampling represented in these lines. Because there were only 18 cell lines in existence and all but Henrietta’s were derived from Caucasians, generalizations about the distribution of gene variants among populations allowed the tracing of a cell line’s provenance back to HeLa. Additionally, it was known that cell lines do not revert to this phenotype but maintain the phenotype of the original donor. Collectively these data suggested that HeLa cells had infiltrated the other cell lines. This cross-contamination explained why it was suddenly possible to culture non-cancerous tissue types when they “spontaneously transformed” after a short time in culture. HeLa was the elusive “transformation factor,” and the other lines had been overrun early during the culture process and were actually HeLa (<mark style="background: #ADCCFFA6;">ErinC, 2009</mark>).

The notion that cells can be defined as Black goes against research that demonstrates that race is socially constructed and not biologically based. It is of note that population genetics is based on frequencies that describe general trends and that traits are not discontinuous in human populations such that one population carries a genetic variant at the exclusion of all other variants. The distribution of G6PH genetic variants is the result of environmental factors that placed selection pressure on the population and, thus, altered the frequency of the A variant in different human populations; this is similar to the explanation of the emergence of haplotypes that vary in frequency among human populations (<mark style="background: #ADCCFFA6;">Online Mendelian Inheritance of Man</mark>). So though the genetic structure of human populations corresponds to stressors specific to geographic locations, this structure does not support essentialist conceptions that racial categories are discrete or informative. A project developed with funding from the National Science Foundation and the American Anthropological Association entitled “<mark style="background: #ADCCFFA6;">Race: Are We so Different?</mark>” provides a deeper analysis of race and genetic variation, as does the PBS series “<mark style="background: #ADCCFFA6;">Race: The Power of Illusion.</mark>” Given the inclination of society to carry essentialist notions concerning genes and race, it is of import to contextualize the narrative of the HeLa cell line within a larger socio-political context. If given cursory address, the discussions regarding cell contamination and race can reify essentialist beliefs regarding race by suggesting that there is an entitativity (characterizing groupness) dimension in this sort of thinking (<mark style="background: #ADCCFFA6;">Donovan, 2013; Donovan, 2015</mark>).

In her book Culturing Life, Landecker remarks on the ways in which the boundary between the scientific community and the lay public became blurred around discussions of cell line contamination by HeLa cells (<mark style="background: #ADCCFFA6;">Landecker, 2010</mark>). That cell lineage was being described in race-based language, and associated with terms like “contamination” and “ aggressive” presents a particularly unique challenge to scientific communication. Though “contamination” in the lab refers to lab practices and is a result of poor sterile technique, the term carries with it a negative connotation, not unlike the ways in which “contamination” is referenced in non- scientific communities.The term “contamination” was often used during the eugenics movements of the US and Nazi Germany. The prefix “eu” implies purity and is applied to describe the pure genetic lineage of those considered “fit” enough to reproduce. Thus, those individuals who were considered “unfit” were prevented from “contaminating” the gene pool of these “pure” populations through policies that regulated reproduction as well as elimination of those individuals deemed unfit (<mark style="background: #ADCCFFA6;">Brignell, 2010a; Brignell 2010b</mark>). This rationale of maintaining a true-breeding population of humans goes against all scientific evidence. Evolutionary theory is based on the fact that hybridization produces genetic diversity in populations allowing them to survive environmental changes.

Additionally, the notion that a cell line derived from an African-American woman was being referred to as “aggressive,” and that the immortality characteristic was attributed to a sexually transmitted viral infection, led to a conflation of the cell line and the person from whom they were derived. The use of “aggressive” was similarly problematic, given the social history of labeling African American women as “angry black females.”

At times it was difficult to know whether the conversation was about the cell line or Henrietta herself when terms like “promiscuous” were used. For scientists, promiscuity refers to a cell line’s ability to take up DNA from its environment and grow more rapidly. However, for the general public, all of these descriptive terms to linked to societal prejudices (<mark style="background: #ADCCFFA6;">Landecker, 2010</mark>). During the height of the Social Darwinism movement, the term “unfit” was often used in conjunction with “promiscuity.” More recently, James Watson, co-discoverer of the structure of DNA has, on more than one occasion, remarked that people of color have an <mark style="background: #ADCCFFA6;">elevated sexual appetite</mark>. Watson’s ideas echo those who showcased <mark style="background: #ADCCFFA6;">Sarah Baartman, known as the Hottentot Venus</mark>, in public venues as a highly sexualized African woman during the 1800s. So though using words like “contamination” and “promiscuous” may seem benign in the lab, it may unintentionally register differently in the minds of students and, be linked to these other discriminatory remarks that have a deep and troubled history.

Interestingly, the scientific community on the whole does not seem ready to address this social implication nor the issue of contaminated cell lines in general. Gartler’s work was extended throughout the 1970s by Walter Nelson-Rees of the Cell Culture Laboratory at UC Berkeley. For more than 10 years, Nelson-Rees collected information from 144 publications identifying cross-contaminated cultures and compiled a list of 279 contaminated lines, more than 40 of which were HeLa. Both Gartler and Nelson-Rees were shunned for exposing cell line contamination. Acknowledging it would devalue years of research, commercially available products, and long-held paradigms about how cells behave in response to environmental toxins, drugs, vaccines, and reprogramming factors. In the 30 years since Gartler and Nelson-Rees presented their findings, little attention has been given to the issue of cell culture contamination and its consequences for biomedical research (<mark style="background: #ADCCFFA6;">Lucey, 2009</mark>).

<mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Video: Duguid, C. 2010. Video: Cell Culture. EuroStemCell. (Producer Kate Doherty) (6 minutes). Link</mark>

With the advent of molecular techniques for identifying cell lines, the issue of cross-contaminated cell lines has resurfaced. John Masters has published widely about the extent to which cell lines appear to be mixed populations, and despite an entire session devoted to the topic in the 2009 American Society for Cell Biology conference, there has been little response to rectify this situation (<mark style="background: #ADCCFFA6;">Masters, 2002, Ouellete & Nardone, 2009</mark>)

The most up-to-date list of cross-contaminated cell lines that has been published includes 360 lines, 106 (9%) of which are HeLa. This list, compiled by Capes-Davis (of CellBank Australia) and a team of researchers from other major international cell banks, was generated through the PubMed database, references within articles relating to the topic, and websites of five major cell banks: ATCC, DSMZ (Germany), ECACC (Europe), JCRB (Japan), and RIKEN (private, Japan) (<mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">Slide 44: HeLa Contamination</mark>). The authors hope that the list will be included in a new initiative improving access to authentication data in the form of a free database, and more recently the lead author, Amanda Capes-Davis, a physician and researcher, has taken to annotating publications in PubMed that contain incorrect cell line identities (<mark style="background: #ADCCFFA6;">Capes-Davis et al., 2010; NCBI, 2014</mark>)

The percentage of contaminated cell lines found in collections has apparently decreased, from the initial 100% contamination of ATCC stocks reported by Gartler in 1967, to present-day estimates for various collections of 18%. However, this decrease may be the result of expansion of collections, and not due to more rigorous methods of derivation and storage. When Gartler found that 100% of lines were contaminated with HeLa, there were very few other lines existing, and methods for immortalizing cells were not yet invented. In Nelson-Rees’s time, more cell lines had been created, but not nearly as many as exist today. The fact that recent studies report significant contamination (10-18%) is disturbing, because we now have highly efficient methods for identifying cell origins (<mark style="background: #ADCCFFA6;">Katsnelson, 2010; Masters, 2012; Del Carpio, 2014; Marrow, 2015; Grens, 2015</mark>).

The <mark style="background: #ADCCFFA6;">DSMZ cell bank</mark> in Germany has played a large role in exposing the issue of cell line cross-contamination, and has been a pioneer among cell banks in practicing measures to improve their collections. It routinely performs multi-parameter (DNA typing, cytogenetic and immunophenotypic) authentication.

Purchasing cells from cell banks instead of sharing among colleagues would help to reduce the misidentification of cell lines, although this may squelch the collaborative and collegial practice of scientific investigation. Others critics suggest that government and private sponsors should require authentication of cell lines when receiving submissions for grants and contracts. In fact, the FDA has adopted this mandate, as has the National Cancer Institute (<mark style="background: #ADCCFFA6;">Chatterjee, 2007; Nardone, 2008</mark>).

Although the cross-contamination issue is one that should be addressed by the cell biology community, stem cell researchers learned early on that verifying newly established stem cell lines is essential. The very nature of stem cell research requires a researcher to be able to demonstrate that a specialized cell is capable of adopting a wide set of cell fates without cell fusion or contamination by other cell lines. This was a particular sticking point when the first putative adult stem cell lines were reported, because they were cultured on embryonic feeder cells. Later studies demonstrated these adult cells were able to adopt multiple cell fates as a consequence of cell fusion between the cell line in question and the mouse embryonic feeders. For this reason, more recent studies have taken great care to keep cell lines pure, and include repeated monitoring of lineage-specific characteristics for that cell line, using molecular techniques to ensure that no cell cross- contamination has occurred (<mark style="background: #ADCCFFA6;">NCBI, 2014; Anonymous, 2015; De Los Angeles et al., 2015</mark>)

